# AirBnB-prelim-analysis

## Introduction
The goal of this project is to understand the AirBnB business via its dataset, which relates to the 2016 data for the city of Seattle.
The dataset consists of three separate tables :
> * calendar.csv : This holds data of the various times a rental unit was used and its related data
> * listings.csv : This holds data of each rental unit as well as inforation on the host
> * reviews.csv : This holds data of reviews give each time a unit was rented. This dataset is not used in the analysis.

In our analysis we will try to answer these questions:
> * Which house is the most popular type in each area?
> * When does each house have the highest price?
> * What features help determine the house price, i.e. can we suggest an optimal price point for a give rental unit?

The information of most important columns used in each dataset is given below:
> *calendar.csv*
> * **listing_id** : Unique identifer for rental unit
> * **date** : When the unit was rented (datetime)
> * **available** : whether unit was rented on that date ( boolean)
> * **price** : Price per day for rental (float)

> *listings.csv*
> * **id** : Unique identifer for rental unit
> * **host_response_time** : response time for host ( categorical data)
> * **host_response_rate** : response rate of host ( percentage)
> * **host_is_superhost** : Whether host is a superhost or not (boolean)
> * **neighbourhood_cleansed** : neighborhood of the unit. Some preliminary processing has been applied to it
> * **zipcode** : Zip code of the unit
> * **property_type** : type of unit, e.g. apartment, house, tent, etc.
> * **acomodates** : number of people for default charges
> * **bathrooms** : number of bathrooms available
> * **bedroons** : number of bedrooms
> * **amenities** : list of amenities available in the unit
> * **price** : cost (USD) per night
> * **review_scores_rating** : unit review out of 5

## Project Flow
The project dealt with the follwing steps:
#### Business and Data Understanding
> We parsed the dataset to understand what metrics were of most importance in Seattle for AirBnB
> We also looked at what features in each dataset were of highest importance for us to furhter explore

#### Data Preparation
> Having shortlisted the data we want to focus on, we have performed data wrangling to:
> * Filter out columns we dont want to process further
> * Deal with NaNs in our Dataset
> * Deal with categorical columns and encode as one-hot for our Linear Regression model

#### Data modelling and Result Evaluation
> In this step, we built charts and ML models to help understand the relation of verious metrics with respect to each other or wrt time.
> We have gleamed questions of interest from the data and have answered these with charts and models.

## Project Conclusion
The details of the project can be read on my [blog post here](https://medium.com/@dracosdracos/analyzing-airbnb-seattle-dataset-00770d802e86)
> The given data has painted a picture of AirBnB's Seattle statistics. We have discovered that:
> By far the most popular property types are Apartments and Houses
> Prices for different property types are fairly consistent with 25-75 percentile scores around USD100. However all properties have major outliers in terms of price-per-night being on the higher side.
> Apartments and Houses show an increase in prices around the middle of the year, while the prices of other types of properties are fairly consistent
> By far the most popular property types are Apartments and Houses
> Most places (by coordinate) have a rather uniform revenue, however a few places stand out with revenues > USD 360,000 over the year
> Downtown, Capitol Hill, Central Area and Queen Anne are the most revenue-generating neighbourhoods of Seattle. The former two are unique among the neighbourhoods as being the only two places where the majority of revenue is generated by apartments.
> The features that best determine a properties' price-per-night include room type, size of the house (i.e. number of bedrooms and bathrooms), property type, and certain amenities available.



## Project information
Libraries Used
> pandas==2.1.4
> seaborn==0.13.2
> matplotlib==3.8.4
> scikit-learn==1.4.2

Files in the repository
> README.md : readme file 
> .gitignore : files to exclude from version control
> medium_airbnb.ipynb : main jupyter file where all analysis takes places
> Dataset files:
> * calendar.csv
> * listings.csv
> * reviews.csv 

Acknowledgements
Dataset credit : Data is made available via [Inside Airbnb](https://insideairbnb.com/). It was downloaded via [Udacity Nanodegree Data Scientist course] (https://www.udacity.com/course/data-scientist-nanodegree--nd025)
The project was done under the supervision of Udacity instructor via the above mentioned course.